README.md, before:

# **Wi-Fi to Ethernet Sharing Script**

This script automates the setup of a Linux device (using Alpine Linux) to connect to a Wi-Fi network and share the internet connection through an Ethernet interface. It handles network configuration, IP forwarding and NAT setup.

## **Disclaimer**

- This script is designed for my personal use and may require adjustments for specific system configurations. Use at your own risk.
- The goal of the scripts is to automate sharing the internet from a notebook running Alpine Linux, completely loaded into RAM (no disk), to a computer via wired connection.
- Here's my use case: the router is in the living room and my PC is in the bedroom. The router is modern enough to provide the full speed of my internet plan even over Wi-Fi, with almost zero latency and fluctuation. I didn't want to run a cable from the living room to the bedroom because it would be too much work. So I thought, "Why not load a minimal system (Alpine Linux) onto a laptop that I no longer use via PXE and share the Wi-Fi connection with the PC?" And that's exactly what I did. Don't judge me, my old notebook consumes less energy than my router.

## **Features**
- Connects the system to a Wi-Fi network using `wpa_supplicant`.
- Configures a static IP on the Ethernet interface.
- Enables IP forwarding to allow internet sharing.
- Sets up comprehensive NAT and firewall rules using `iptables` to enable unrestricted traffic flow in all directions:
  - Between devices on the internal network
  - From internal devices to external networks
  - From the notebook to any destination
  - ICMP (ping) traffic in all directions
- Includes a robust network monitoring script that automatically:
  - Checks internet connectivity at regular intervals
  - Restores network connectivity when issues are detected
  - Periodically verifies and reinstates iptables rules if they're missing
- **NEW**: Safe to run multiple times without breaking existing configurations
- **NEW**: Automatically backs up network settings before making changes
- **NEW**: Stores configuration in a file for consistent operation after updates
- **NEW**: Auto-detects gateway IP address or allows custom specification

## **Prerequisites**
- Alpine Linux.
- Internet access.
---

## **Setup**

### **1. Clone the Repository**
Check System Date and Time
SSL certificates are sensitive to the system date and time. If the date or time zone is incorrect, certificate validation may fail.
````
date
````
If the time is wrong, fix it
````
date -s "YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS"
````

```bash
apk update && apk add git
git clone https://github.com/enrell/alpine-wifi-bridge.git
cd alpine-wifi-bridge
```

### **2. Make the Script Executable**
```bash
chmod +x script.sh
```

## **Usage**

### **1. Run the Script**
Run the script as root or with `sudo` to ensure it has the required permissions:
```bash
./script.sh
```

### **2. Provide Wi-Fi Credentials**
If the script doesn't find an existing Wi-Fi configuration, it will prompt you to enter:
- **SSID**: The name of the Wi-Fi network.
- **Password**: The Wi-Fi password.

### **3. Gateway IP Configuration**
The script will:
- Automatically detect your gateway IP address from the network configuration
- If detection fails, it will ask if you want to specify a custom gateway IP
- You can enter your router's IP address (typically something like 192.168.1.1 or 10.0.0.1)

### **4. Internet Sharing**
The script will:
- Connect to the Wi-Fi network.
- Set up a static IP on the Ethernet interface (`10.42.0.1` by default).
- Enable NAT and IP forwarding.
- Configure comprehensive iptables rules that allow unrestricted network traffic:
  - All traffic between connected devices
  - All traffic to and from the internet
  - All traffic to and from the notebook
  - ICMP traffic for ping and network diagnostics

## **Upgrading from Previous Versions**

If you're upgrading from a previous version of this script:

1. **Backup Your Configuration**: Although the script now automatically backs up your network configuration, it's always good practice to manually back up important files:
   ```bash
   cp /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf.bak
   ```

2. **Update the Repository**:
   ```bash
   cd alpine-wifi-bridge
   git pull
   ```

3. **Run the Script**: The updated script is designed to be safe to run multiple times and will:
   - Detect existing configurations
   - Only apply changes where needed
   - Store your network interface names for consistent operation
   - Auto-detect your gateway IP address
   ```bash
   ./script.sh
   ```

4. **If Something Goes Wrong**: You can restore your original settings:
   ```bash
   ./script.sh --restore
   ```

# **Troubleshooting**

1. **Wi-Fi Not Connecting**
   - Ensure the Wi-Fi SSID and password are correct.
   - Check that the `wpa_supplicant` service is running:  
     ```bash
     ps aux | grep wpa_supplicant
     ```

2. **No Ethernet Interface**
   - Verify the Ethernet interface is detected:
     ```bash
     ip link show
     ```
   - If unavailable, check hardware or use a USB Ethernet adapter.

3. **Internet Not Shared**
   - Ensure `iptables` rules are set correctly:
     ```bash
     iptables -t nat -L
     iptables -L FORWARD
     iptables -L INPUT
     iptables -L OUTPUT
     ```
   - Verify that IP forwarding is enabled:
     ```bash
     sysctl net.ipv4.ip_forward
     ```
   - Make sure that all required rules are present. You can restart the network monitor to automatically check and fix missing rules:
     ```bash
     python network-restart.py
     ```

4. **Gateway IP Issues**
   - If you're having connectivity problems, check your gateway IP:
     ```bash
     ip route | grep default
     ```
   - If the gateway IP is incorrect, you can edit the configuration file:
     ```bash
     nano /etc/alpine-wifi-bridge/config
     ```
   - Change the `GATEWAY_IP` value to your router's IP address, then run:
     ```bash
     ./script.sh
     ```

5. **Configuration Issues After Update**
   - If you experience issues after updating the script, you can restore your original settings:
     ```bash
     ./script.sh --restore
     ```
   - Check the configuration file for any issues:
     ```bash
     cat /etc/alpine-wifi-bridge/config
     ```

# Network monitor
The network_restart.py script is designed to automatically monitor your network connection and quickly restart the network interface if the connection drops. It aims to minimize interruptions, with a particular focus on activities where low downtime is critical.

The script works by:
   - Monitoring the network to ensure that it remains connected.
   - Automatically reconnecting to the network if the connection is lost.
   - Reinforcing connectivity by running necessary commands when the network fails.
   - Periodically checking that all required iptables rules are in place and fixing any missing rules.
   - Ensuring IP forwarding is enabled after any network restarts.
   - **NEW**: Reading interface names from the configuration file for consistent operation.
   - **NEW**: Using the correct gateway IP address from the configuration file.

## Install python and run:
Install:
````
apk update && apk add python3~3.12
````
Run:
````
python network-restart.py
````

# Revert the settings to their original state
By running the script with the --restore flag, you can revert the settings to their original state.
````
./script.sh --restore
````

---

## **Customization**

You can modify the following settings directly in the script:
- **Static IP for Ethernet**: Change the `10.42.0.1` address in the script.
- **Wi-Fi Configuration Path**: Default is `/etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf`.
- **Configuration File**: The script now stores settings in `/etc/alpine-wifi-bridge/config`.
- **Gateway IP**: The script auto-detects this, but you can edit it in the configuration file.

---

## **Contributing**

Feel free to submit issues or pull requests!

---

## **License**

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

fix: use Alpine Linux's native configuration methods
- Replace Debian-style /etc/network/if-pre-up.d/ with Alpine's /etc/local.d/
- Create iptables.start script for loading rules at boot
- Enable local service with rc-update to ensure scripts run at startup
- Fix 'could not parse /etc/network/interfaces' error

README.md, after:

# **Wi-Fi to Ethernet Sharing Script**

This script automates the setup of a Linux device (using Alpine Linux) to connect to a Wi-Fi network and share the internet connection through an Ethernet interface. It handles network configuration, IP forwarding and NAT setup.

## **Disclaimer**

- This script is designed for my personal use and may require adjustments for specific system configurations. Use at your own risk.
- The goal of the scripts is to automate sharing the internet from a notebook running Alpine Linux, completely loaded into RAM (no disk), to a computer via wired connection.
- Here's my use case: the router is in the living room and my PC is in the bedroom. The router is modern enough to provide the full speed of my internet plan even over Wi-Fi, with almost zero latency and fluctuation. I didn't want to run a cable from the living room to the bedroom because it would be too much work. So I thought, "Why not load a minimal system (Alpine Linux) onto a laptop that I no longer use via PXE and share the Wi-Fi connection with the PC?" And that's exactly what I did. Don't judge me, my old notebook consumes less energy than my router.

## **Features**
- Connects the system to a Wi-Fi network using `wpa_supplicant`.
- Configures a static IP on the Ethernet interface.
- Enables IP forwarding to allow internet sharing.
- Sets up comprehensive NAT and firewall rules using `iptables` to enable unrestricted traffic flow in all directions:
  - Between devices on the internal network
  - From internal devices to external networks
  - From the notebook to any destination
  - ICMP (ping) traffic in all directions
- Includes a robust network monitoring script that automatically:
  - Checks internet connectivity at regular intervals
  - Restores network connectivity when issues are detected
  - Periodically verifies and reinstates iptables rules if they're missing
- **NEW**: Safe to run multiple times without breaking existing configurations
- **NEW**: Automatically backs up network settings before making changes
- **NEW**: Stores configuration in a file for consistent operation after updates
- **NEW**: Auto-detects gateway IP address or allows custom specification
- **NEW**: Uses Alpine Linux's native configuration methods (no more /etc/network errors)

## **Prerequisites**
- Alpine Linux.
- Internet access.
---

## **Setup**

### **1. Clone the Repository**
Check System Date and Time
SSL certificates are sensitive to the system date and time. If the date or time zone is incorrect, certificate validation may fail.
````
date
````
If the time is wrong, fix it
````
date -s "YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS"
````

```bash
apk update && apk add git
git clone https://github.com/enrell/alpine-wifi-bridge.git
cd alpine-wifi-bridge
```

### **2. Make the Script Executable**
```bash
chmod +x script.sh
```

## **Usage**

### **1. Run the Script**
Run the script as root or with `sudo` to ensure it has the required permissions:
```bash
./script.sh
```

### **2. Provide Wi-Fi Credentials**
If the script doesn't find an existing Wi-Fi configuration, it will prompt you to enter:
- **SSID**: The name of the Wi-Fi network.
- **Password**: The Wi-Fi password.

### **3. Gateway IP Configuration**
The script will:
- Automatically detect your gateway IP address from the network configuration
- If detection fails, it will ask if you want to specify a custom gateway IP
- You can enter your router's IP address (typically something like 192.168.1.1 or 10.0.0.1)

### **4. Internet Sharing**
The script will:
- Connect to the Wi-Fi network.
- Set up a static IP on the Ethernet interface (`10.42.0.1` by default).
- Enable NAT and IP forwarding.
- Configure comprehensive iptables rules that allow unrestricted network traffic:
  - All traffic between connected devices
  - All traffic to and from the internet
  - All traffic to and from the notebook
  - ICMP traffic for ping and network diagnostics

## **Upgrading from Previous Versions**

If you're upgrading from a previous version of this script:

1. **Backup Your Configuration**: Although the script now automatically backs up your network configuration, it's always good practice to manually back up important files:
   ```bash
   cp /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf.bak
   ```

2. **Update the Repository**:
   ```bash
   cd alpine-wifi-bridge
   git pull
   ```

3. **Run the Script**: The updated script is designed to be safe to run multiple times and will:
   - Detect existing configurations
   - Only apply changes where needed
   - Store your network interface names for consistent operation
   - Auto-detect your gateway IP address
   ```bash
   ./script.sh
   ```

4. **If Something Goes Wrong**: You can restore your original settings:
   ```bash
   ./script.sh --restore
   ```

# **Troubleshooting**

1. **Wi-Fi Not Connecting**
   - Ensure the Wi-Fi SSID and password are correct.
   - Check that the `wpa_supplicant` service is running:  
     ```bash
     ps aux | grep wpa_supplicant
     ```

2. **No Ethernet Interface**
   - Verify the Ethernet interface is detected:
     ```bash
     ip link show
     ```
   - If unavailable, check hardware or use a USB Ethernet adapter.

3. **Internet Not Shared**
   - Ensure `iptables` rules are set correctly:
     ```bash
     iptables -t nat -L
     iptables -L FORWARD
     iptables -L INPUT
     iptables -L OUTPUT
     ```
   - Verify that IP forwarding is enabled:
     ```bash
     sysctl net.ipv4.ip_forward
     ```
   - Make sure that all required rules are present. You can restart the network monitor to automatically check and fix missing rules:
     ```bash
     python network-restart.py
     ```

4. **Gateway IP Issues**
   - If you're having connectivity problems, check your gateway IP:
     ```bash
     ip route | grep default
     ```
   - If the gateway IP is incorrect, you can edit the configuration file:
     ```bash
     nano /etc/alpine-wifi-bridge/config
     ```
   - Change the `GATEWAY_IP` value to your router's IP address, then run:
     ```bash
     ./script.sh
     ```

5. **Configuration Issues After Update**
   - If you experience issues after updating the script, you can restore your original settings:
     ```bash
     ./script.sh --restore
     ```
   - Check the configuration file for any issues:
     ```bash
     cat /etc/alpine-wifi-bridge/config
     ```

6. **Errors About Missing Files or Directories**
   - The script now uses Alpine Linux's native configuration methods
   - If you see errors about missing files or directories, make sure you're using the latest version of the script
   - The script creates all necessary directories automatically

# Network monitor
The network_restart.py script is designed to automatically monitor your network connection and quickly restart the network interface if the connection drops. It aims to minimize interruptions, with a particular focus on activities where low downtime is critical.

The script works by:
   - Monitoring the network to ensure that it remains connected.
   - Automatically reconnecting to the network if the connection is lost.
   - Reinforcing connectivity by running necessary commands when the network fails.
   - Periodically checking that all required iptables rules are in place and fixing any missing rules.
   - Ensuring IP forwarding is enabled after any network restarts.
   - **NEW**: Reading interface names from the configuration file for consistent operation.
   - **NEW**: Using the correct gateway IP address from the configuration file.

## Install python and run:
Install:
````
apk update && apk add python3~3.12
````
Run:
````
python network-restart.py
````

# Revert the settings to their original state
By running the script with the --restore flag, you can revert the settings to their original state.
````
./script.sh --restore
````

---

## **Customization**

You can modify the following settings directly in the script:
- **Static IP for Ethernet**: Change the `10.42.0.1` address in the script.
- **Wi-Fi Configuration Path**: Default is `/etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf`.
- **Configuration File**: The script now stores settings in `/etc/alpine-wifi-bridge/config`.
- **Gateway IP**: The script auto-detects this, but you can edit it in the configuration file.

---

## **Contributing**

Feel free to submit issues or pull requests!

---

## **License**

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
